Add nf-core modules walk-through (#165)
NBISweden/Training-Tech-shorts: posts/2026-05-28-nf-core-modules/index.qmd

---
title: "Working with nf-core modules"
date: 2026-05-28
date-modified: last-modified
author:
  - Erik Fasterius
categories:
  - "Nextflow"
  - "Workflow management"
  - "nf-core"
code-annotations: hover
---

## Introduction

If you've been writing Nextflow pipelines for a while, you might have found
yourself in the situation where you end up either writing the same process

> multiple time, or even just copy-and-pasting processes from your previous

Reviewer: ```suggestion
multiple times, or even just copy-and-pasting processes from your previous
```

pipelines. Another way of doing this is through the [nf-core
community](https://nf-co.re/), which provides a large library of pre-written,
community-maintained Nextflow _modules_, easily installable through a command
line utility. You may think that nf-core modules are only meant to be used
inside nf-core pipelines, but this isn't the case; nf-core modules can be used
in any Nextflow pipeline, and this post will give you an introduction to them.

Please note that a basic understanding and general familiarity of Nextflow is
recommended in order to fully utilise this introduction.

## What is nf-core?

While the nf-core community does a lot of things, these are the major offerings

> that are useful to overall users and pipeline developers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that are useful overall to users and pipeline developers:
```

- **Pipelines:** Full, end-to-end pipelines for various data types and
  technologies (_e.g._ `nf-core/rnaseq` or `nf-core/sarek`)
- **Modules:** Individual processes wrapping specific tools (_e.g._ `FASTQC` or
  `MULTIQC`).
- **Subworkflows:** Multiple modules chained together for common tasks of varied
  size (_e.g._ sorting, indexing and summary statistics of BAM files)

> At the time of writing, there are over a 100 pipelines, 120 subworkflows and a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of writing, there are over 100 pipelines, 120 subworkflows and a
```

whopping 1800 modules.

## Installation

If you want to work with nf-core modules, you'll need at the very least a
Nextflow installation, the [nf-core CLI](https://nf-co.re/docs/nf-core-tools)
and preferably a container engine (_e.g._ Docker or Apptainer); we'll cover the
installation of the CLI here.

```bash
# Pixi global install
pixi global install nf-core

# Pip install
pip install nf-core

# Conda install in a new environment
conda create --name nf-core-env nf-core nextflow
```

::: {.callout-note}

> Both Conda and Pixi relies on the [Anaconda registry](https://anaconda.org/),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both Conda and Pixi rely on the [Anaconda registry](https://anaconda.org/),
```

which has a bit of a delay on it compared to pip when it comes to updates. This
mostly matters for pipeline maintainers, who often want the very latest version
as soon as it arrives, but matters much less if you just want to be able to
install and work with modules and/or subworkflows.
:::

## Finding modules

You can list modules available for installation using the command line:

```bash
nf-core modules list remote
```

You can also filter by name:

```bash
nf-core modules list remote samtools
```

> If you want more information that what modules are available you can also check

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want more information about which modules are available you can also check
```

the [nf-core website](https://nf-co.re/modules). There you can find module
inputs, outputs, who maintains the module, and other information.

Let's look at the [FASTQC module](https://nf-co.re/modules/fastqc/). It has a
very short description; we can see that it takes a single tuple as input, and it
has three separate output tuples: the HTML report, the compressed archive with
the results, and `versions_fastqc` that stores the `fastqc` version used by the
module.

> Something common for both the inputs and the outputs is the `meta` map: this a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Something common for both the inputs and the outputs is the `meta` map: this is a
```

```{.groovy filename="main.nf"}
include { FASTQC } from "./modules/nf-core/fastqc"

(...)
```

We can't simply add the module to the end of our workflow though, since the
output of `DOWNLOAD_FASTQ_FILES` is just a single path, while the `FASTQC`
module takes a `[meta, path]` tuple as input (the former could trivially create
such a tuple in its output since it has the `id` value in its input, but it was
purposefully written in this sub-par way to make a better example of how to
create a `meta` map). So, let's add the new module and give it the proper input
it wants:

```{.groovy filename="main.nf"}
    (...)

    DOWNLOAD_FASTQ_FILES (
        ch_input
    )
    FASTQC (                                                             // <1>
        DOWNLOAD_FASTQ_FILES.out.map { it -> [[id: it.simpleName], it] } // <1>
    )                                                                    // <1>
}
```

 1. Add the FASTQC module to the workflow

If you try to run this workflow using _e.g._ `nextflow run main.nf`, you'll most
likely run into an error in the FASTQC module: `.command.sh: line 8: fastqc:
command not found` - this is because `fastqc` isn't actually installed.

> Thankfully, nf-core module already have _e.g._ Docker images tested for each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thankfully, nf-core modules already have _e.g._ Docker images tested for each
```

module, but we'll need to add some configuration before we can use them.

## Configuring modules

### Containers

In order for us to be able to utilise the Docker images available for the
modules, we can add the following to the `nextflow.config` file:

```{.groovy filename="nextflow.config"}
profiles {
    docker {
        docker.enabled = true
    }
}
```

We can then run `nextflow run main.nf -profile docker`, which will successfully
run the full pipeline.

### Outputs

If you ran the pipeline you will notice that there are no output files: neither

> our `DOWNLOAD_FASTQ_FILES` or the `FASTQC` specifies `publishDir` directives

Reviewer: ```suggestion
our `DOWNLOAD_FASTQ_FILES` nor the `FASTQC` specifies `publishDir` directives
```

        [ id: 'SRR935090', link: 'https://ndownloader.figshare.com/files/39539767' ],
        [ id: 'SRR935091', link: 'https://ndownloader.figshare.com/files/39539770' ],
        [ id: 'SRR935092', link: 'https://ndownloader.figshare.com/files/39539773' ]
    )

    DOWNLOAD_FASTQ_FILES (
        ch_input
    )
    FASTQC (
        DOWNLOAD_FASTQ_FILES.out.map { it -> [[id: it.simpleName], it] }
    )

    publish:               // <2>
    html = FASTQC.out.html // <2>
}

(...)

output {               // <3>
    html {             // <3>
        path "fastqc/" // <3>
    }                  // <3>
}                      // <3>
```

 1. Add `main:` directive
 2. Add `publish:` directive
 3. Add workflow `output`

Using the new workflow outputs method, we specify that our workflow has an
output called `html` that we want to publish (which is itself the `html` output
from the `FASTQC` module), and we want to publish this output in the `fastqc/`
directory inside the Nextflow `outputDir` directory (which is `results/` by
default).

We might also want to change the default publishing mode from the default
instead copy the published files, which can be done by adding a single line in

> the workflow configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We might also want to change the default publishing mode from symlinking 
to copying the published files, which can be done by adding a single line in
the workflow configuration file.
```

```{.groovy filename="nextflow.config"}
workflow.output.mode = "copy"
```

> The reason nf-core modules don't publish any outputs by default is that

Reviewer: There's also the technical issues with module aliasing.

different outputs might be desired in different pipelines, so it is up to you
to specify what and where you want to publish.

### The `conf/modules.config` file

> The nf-core modules are made in such a way as to allow granular modification in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The nf-core modules are written in such a way as to allow granular modification in
```

a per-workflow manner, without needing to change the module code itself. This is
done through the `conf/modules.config` file, and it allows _e.g._ adding

> additional command line flags to the command. For example:

Reviewer: Add that optional files will always be an `input:`. They cannot be supplied through the `ext.args` option.

```{.groovy filename="modules.config"}
process {
    withName: FASTQC {
        ext.args = { "--version" }
    }
}
```

We also need to add `includeConfig "conf/modules.config"` to the
`nextflow.config` file. If you try to run this you'll get an error, as FastQC

> the module is no longer actually running the computations and instead just

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`nextflow.config` file. If you try to run this you'll get an error, as the
FastQC module is no longer actually running the computations and instead just
```

prints the version; we can see that the command now includes the `--version`
flag. Change it to something more useful, like `--quiet`.

## Patching modules

There might be cases where you genuinely cannot use an nf-core module as-is, and

> you definitely need to change the module code itself. Luckily, there's also a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you definitely need to change the module code itself. Simply modifying the module is insufficient. If you decide to update the module from nf-core, the changes would be lost. Luckily, there's also a
```

mechanic included to be able to do this: module _patches_. As a simplified
example, let's say that we want to change the module's label to a custom label:

```{.groovy filename="modules/nf-core/fastqc/main.nf"}
process FASTQC {
    tag "${meta.id}"
    label 'my_custom_label' // <1>
    (...)
```

 1. Change the module label

> Just changing the code is not enough, however, and we also need to apply the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To register the change with nf-core tools, we also need to apply the
```

> patch:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
patch command:
```
